# Catholics in the Global South: Flannery O'Connor and James Joyce

I would like to start this talk with a brief explanation of why I chose the topic that I chose, as I think my process in doing so is relevant to my argument. When I read about the conference and its call for papers, it caught me at a time when I had been thinking a lot about the aesthetics of Catholicism. I took interest in the numerous acclaimed artists and authors of recent times who owe a great deal of their aesthetics - their style - to the Catholic mythos. Examples include Cormac McCarthy, Thomas Pynchon, Don DeLillo, Annie Dillard, F. Scott Fitzgerald, Ernest Hemingway, Anne Rice, Muriel Spark, J.R.R. Tolkien, Andy Warhol, and even three out of four of the Beatles (all but Ringo were raised Catholic). I had also become interested in the close association that Catholicism has with the Global South and its status as an ostracized minority in many recent cultures, such as the British empire, the unified Germany, the United States, and others, despite its highly organized and centralized universal bureaucracy (the word Catholic, after all, means universal). So I saw this conference as an opportunity to look more deeply into that relationship between Catholicism and the Global South, and as I am trained primarily as a literary analyst, I wanted to see how Catholicism manifests in American Deep Southern literature as compared to how it manifests in other Global Southern literatures and what that comparison might bring to light.

Religion and religiosity in general are such deeply different beasts in the United States than they are elsewhere in the world and, in looking into it, I found that this sharp contrast is illustrated in particularly interesting and powerful ways in a juxtaposition of the fictions of American author Flannery O’Connor and Irish author James Joyce. Besides living and writing around roughly similar times and being very deeply affected by the Catholic faith—and by the sensibilities of the Global South, these two authors stood out as particularly interesting to compare because, in many ways, they embody quite opposite attitudes towards the faith in their fictions, corresponding to the respective cultures and societies from which they come. O’Connor uses Christian symbolism and allegory to tell grotesque, almost epic or mythological stories of the depravity of man in a world “charged with the grandeur of God,” as the Catholic clerical poet Gerard Manley Hopkins puts it. Joyce, on the other hand, focuses on the ways that the Catholic faith affects the psychological states of those who participate in it, writing in a more naturalistic way about much more pedestrian, human characters. 

One particularly salient facet of this contrast is demonstrated by that aspect of O’Connor’s fiction that leads the critic Albert Sonnenfeld to analyze her as a “Catholic Baptist writer.” Sonnenfeld pays particular attention to O’Connor’s novels *The Violent Bear it Away*, and *Wise Blood*. He notes, 
>It is no accident that the Christian denomination of the South is Baptist and that religious extremists in that region are “fundamentalist,” for Flannery O’Connor sees the essential strategy of salvation as a return to the stormy principles of the prophet in the wilderness. We are not now ready for the kingdom of heaven to be taken by the suave yoke and lightened burden of Christ’s love; our juncture of spiritual history is that of John the Baptist and of violent conquest of the kingdom.

*Wise Blood* tells the story of Hazel Motes, a World War II veteran who, despite being a militant atheist, is obsessed with the concept of theology and religious faith. After a series of bizarre occurrences and disillusioning encounters with various unsettling characters, Motes becomes an ascetic, blinding himself with quicklime, wearing barbed wire around his body, and filling his shoes with rocks and broken glass, framing himself as a prophet, or perhaps, anti-prophet. Somewhat similarly, *The Violent Bear It Away* follows Francis Tarwater, a teenage boy raised by his superstitious and fundamentalist Christian great-uncle to be a great prophet. When his great-uncle dies, however, young Tarwater is tempted by a voice in his head, implied to be the devil, to disregard his uncle’s wishes. He burns his great-uncle’s house down with his body inside and leaves to live with his other uncle Rayber and his mentally handicapped son Bishop. Rayber wishes to raise Francis as a modern, educated young man free from the superstition of his great-uncle’s fundamentalist Christianity, but Francis is skeptical. After a series of violent, religiously charged episodes, Francis realizes that he cannot escape his destiny to become a prophet and goes away preaching about “God and the terrible speed of his mercy.” 

It is particularly interesting to take note of these two characters, Hazel Motes and Francis Tarwater, as they relate to the characters that James Joyce writes about, like Stephen Dedalus from Ulysses and A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, who like Joyce, is brought up and educated in the Jesuit tradition of Irish Catholicism. Whereas Dedalus is steeped in the mild, gentle sensibilities of Jesus Christ, as proposed by the Society of Jesus, O’Connor’s Motes and Tarwater are much more in line with the sensibilities of John the Baptist, as Sonnenfeld points out. One might say that if Joyce writes about and is influenced by the Society of Jesus, O’Connor writes about and is influenced by a hypothetical “Society of John the Baptist.” 
	
The prophet in the wilderness’s influence on O’Connor can also be seen in her short story “The River,” which follows a very young boy’s trip with his babysitter, Mrs. Connin, to see a radical, charismatic reverend who makes a habit of preaching and baptizing people in a river near their town. The boy, Harry Ashfield, has grown up in a fairly secular household with not much respect for religion or Christianity. When he sees a picture of Jesus in Mrs. Connin’s house, he asks who it is, and when she tells him, he notes to himself that “he would have thought Jesus Christ was a word like ‘oh’ or ‘damn’ or ‘God,’ or maybe someone who had cheated them out of something sometime.” Perhaps for this reason, Harry becomes intrigued when Mrs. Connin tells him they are going to see the preacher at the river, Reverend Bevel Summers, who has a reputation as a healer. Harry even tells Mrs. Connin that his name is Bevel, and he is referred to as such for the rest of the story, even by the narrator. 
	
The reverend is very clearly modelled on the figure of John the Baptist, and Harry may be seen as a kind of crooked or distorted younger version of the prophet. The reverend tells the crowds that surround him, “If you ain’t come for Jesus, you ain’t come for me. If you just come to see can you leave your pain in the river, you ain’t come for Jesus. You can’t leave your pain in the river. I never told nobody that,” harkening back to John the Baptist’s emphatic claims that he is preparing the way for one much greater than he, one so great that he is not even worthy of fastening his sandals. The reverend’s message resonates greatly with young Harry, but perhaps because of his secular upbringing, in which he is surrounded by blasphemies and indifference towards such things, he is unable live up to the model set by the prophet and the preacher, as, it is implied at the end, he drowns in the river when trying to baptize himself. 
	
Failures like this are a common thread in O’Connor’s fiction—failures arising from characters aspiring to or finding similarities with religious figures, but being a grotesque, distorted version of them in some way. The Misfit, the escaped convict and serial murderer from “A Good Man is Hard to Find” and Tom Shiftlet from “The Life You Save May Be Your Own,” for example, both ultimately amount to distorted versions of Jesus Christ himself. The Misfit travels with two other men, invoking multiple Christian images such as Jesus transfigured on the mountain with Moses and Elijah, or Jesus hanging on the cross with the two thieves on either side of him. He even outrightly and explicitly compares himself to Jesus, saying, “It was the same case with Him as with me except He hadn’t committed any crime and they could prove I had committed one because they had the papers on me,” even though he cannot even remember what the crime was that he committed. He in this way shows a kind of pseudo-innocence that forges both a similarity to and stark departure from Jesus, cementing his status as an almost-Christ-like figure—one who perhaps would be Christ-like if things in his life were just a little bit different and who instead turns out to be extremely not Christ-like.
	
Tom Shiftlet shows similar Christ-like attributes, doing many things in the vein of Jesus, but wildly distorting them to instead become a kind of anti-Jesus. He is a twenty-eight year old carpenter, much like Jesus, except that he has a withered, unusable arm. He drifts around looking for work, but he decries his society’s preoccupation with money. When he arrives at Lucynell Crater’s house, 
He told the old woman then that all most people were interested in was money, but he asked what a man was made for. He asked her if a man was made for money, or what. He asked her what she thought she was made for but she didn’t answer, she only sat rocking and wondered if a one-armed man could put a new roof on her garden house. He asked a lot of questions that she didn’t answer. He comes across here as a less thoughtful, less articulate version of Jesus, vaguely espousing a watered down version of Jesus’ claim that it is more difficult for a rich man to enter heaven than it is for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle. Another interesting moment is when he first arrives at the house. “He turned his back and faced the sunset. He swung both his whole and his short arm up slowly so that they indicated an expanse of sky and his figure formed a crooked cross.” The distorted, grotesque parallelism to Jesus is obvious, as it is when he teaches the old woman’s mute and mentally handicapped daughter to say the word “bird,” that is, he makes the dumb speak, and when he repairs the broken down automobile in their front yard, after which he “had an expression of serious modesty on his face as if he had just raised the dead.” 

In the end, though, Shiftlet shows his true, decidedly un-Christ-like colors, marrying the old woman’s daughter in order to collect a sum of money from her and then leaving her at a diner. Even after doing so, however, he still fancies himself a virtuous, upstanding person. As he is driving away from the diner at which he abandoned his wife in the car that he stole from the old woman, he thinks to himself  “that a man with a car had a responsibility to others and he kept his eye out for a hitchhiker.” He eventually comes across one, a young boy on the side of the road, and as he tries to make conversation with the young boy about his mother, the boy suddenly exclaims, “‘My old woman is a flea bag and yours is a stinking polecat!’ and with that he flung the door open and jumped out with the suitcase into the ditch.” Shiftlet experiences a strange, deeply-ironic passion-like scene in which he “felt that the rottenness of the world was about to engulf him. He raised his arm and let it fall again to his breast. ‘Oh Lord!’ he prayed. ‘Break forth and wash the slime from this earth,’” not understanding, of course, that he himself is among that slime of the earth. 

This is O’Connor’s predominant strategy in engaging with Catholicism—to show the depravity of the world by comparing the people in it to idealized religious figures like Jesus and John the Baptist, a comparison in which the people in the world do not, cannot, measure up. As noted before, she depicts a world that is “charged with the grandeur of God,” but people who are not charged with it enough.

James Joyce takes quite the opposite position—his world is too charged with Catholic fervor, and it is a cause for much grief and destruction. One of the most infamous aspects of life as a Catholic is the so-called “Catholic guilt” that arises when a practitioner of the faith transgresses against one of its many moral stipulations, and Joyce is surely one of the great depicters of this guilt in his fiction. One example is the crippling guilt Stephen Dedalus experiences after his first sexual encounter, which is with a prostitute in the red light district of Dublin. In the months after this first encounter, he would often return to the area and “pass by them calmly waiting for a sudden movement of his own will or a sudden call to his sinloving soul from their soft perfumed flesh. Yet as he prowled in quest of that call, his senses, stultified only by his desire, would note keenly all that wounded or shamed them.” This guilt is magnified by the retreat that he attends for his Catholic school, run by the Jesuits, during which the priest giving the retreat speaks at length and in great, horrific detail about the experience of being in hell. Just a brief example of the many terrifying and disgusting images of hell that he invokes:
>Consider then what must be the foulness of the air of hell. Imagine some foul and putrid corpse that has lain rotting and decomposing in the grave, a jellylike mass of liquid corruption. Imagine such a corpse a prey to flames, devoured by the fire of burning brimstone and giving off dense choking fumes of nauseous loathsome decomposition. And then imagine this sickening stench, multiplied a millionfold and millionfold again from the millions upon millions of fetid carcasses massed together in the reeking darkness, a huge and rotting human fungus. Imagine all this and you will have some idea of the horror of the stench of hell.

It is unsurprising that this and the many other gruesome images that the priest invokes over the course of the retreat (a fifty pages-long affair in my edition of the book) have an intense effect on the guilty young Stephen. The priest’s strategy in invoking these images is very much in the tradition of the Spritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola, the founder of the Society of Jesus, or the Jesuits. A major aspect of the Ignatian exercises is deep contemplation and meditation upon biblical and theological concepts, imagining oneself in the situation of Jesus, or imagining the nature of heaven or hell or purgatory. As noted before, Joyce is deeply affected and influenced by this very Jesuit way of thinking which is starkly opposed to O’Connor’s John the Baptist-inspired sensibilities. Joyce pays much more attention to specifically Catholic teachings and approaches them in a more scholastic, cerebral way than O’Connor. Young Harry Ashfield in O’Connor’s “The River” finds and takes a book called The Life of Jesus Christ for Readers Under Twelve, which tells of such things as when Jesus drove “a crowd of pigs out of a man.” Joyce’s characters, on the other hand, read and memorize the official Catechism of the Catholic Church, read the Scripture in Latin, and so on. In “The Sisters,” the first story in Dubliners, the young narrator, while mourning the death of a priest he had been close to, notes:
>He had studied in the Irish college in Rome and he had taught me to pronounce Latin properly. He had told me stories about the catacombs and about Napoleon Bonaparte, and he had explained to me the meaning of the different ceremonies of the Mass, of the different vestments worn by the priest. Sometimes he had amused himself by putting difficult questions to me, asking me what one should do in certain circumstances or whether such and such sins were mortal or venial or only imperfections. His questions showed me how complex and mysterious were certain institutions of the Church which I had always regarded as the simplest acts.

It is likely that Joyce sees this approach to theology and spirituality as problematic because of the intense psychological toll that it exacts on its practitioners. Joseph Valente and Margot Backus give a study of sexual initiations in Joyce’s fiction through the lense of Lacanian psychoanalysis, saying that Joyce’s literary style “affords greater insight into how the social world leaves its most salient imprint upon the individual subject through contingent personal experience, and how, conversely, such highly individuated experience lends intense affect to larger social movements and ideologies.” In Ulysses, after Stephen Dedalus has grown and stopped practicing the faith, he still admits to being the “servant of two masters, an English and an Italian,” by which he means, as he tells his friend Haines, “the imperial British state and the holy Roman catholic and apostolic church.” Even after he has renounced the faith, which occurs towards the end of A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, he still feels as though it is a “master” that he serves. Even calling the Church by its full moniker as it appears in the Nicene Creed indicates its overreaching influence on his mental state. He cannot help but remember and recite the myriad phrases and doctrines found in the Scripture, the mass, and the catechism, many of which are in Latin and which are a big influence on his poetry, as can be seen in the “Proteus” section of Ulysses.

By writing about Catholicism in this thoughtful, psychological way, Joyce puts it in quite the opposite position than does O’Connor in relation to their respective Global South communities, and their opposite positionings of it are fairly indicative of their respective communities’ general religious tendencies. It is no secret that the American South is one of the more religiously fervent regions in the Western world, and Flannery O’Connor is a clear and iconic example of that fervor in the literature of the area, and Joyce and his popularity is equally reflective of the growing skepticism in Europe.

*This paper was presented at the 2018 Deep South in the Global South conference at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette.*