# Lennon-McCartney: Collaboration or Two-Headed Monster?

The mastermind behind one of the most significant and widespread cultural phenomena in human history was actually two minds. The songwriting team of John Lennon and Paul McCartney and their illustrious career with the Beatles has garnered incredible amounts of attention in the popular mind and has had a deep influence on just about every popular musical act that has come after them. As so often happens with creative collaborations, though, personal friction and dispute led to quite an early demise for the pair, lasting not even ten years. Their premature downfall and that of other impactful musical collaborations like The Police or Fleetwood Mac are reminders that behind the unified authorial voice of the product, there lies a multitude of extremely different authorial personalities at play, often in competition with each other. One personality may overshadow another in some instances and vice-versa in others. In a world obsessed with individual credit and intellectual property — and with the cult of personality surrounding artists — it is difficult to latch on to a coherent theory of authorial attribution when it comes to collaborations. Lennon-McCartney proves a particularly difficult one to analyze and draw conclusions about, which has resulted in a wide array of popular interpretations of the nature of their authorial voice. 

Lennon speaks extensively in a 1980 interview with Playboy about the authorship of many individual Beatles songs and about the nature of his creative relationship with McCartney. He puts forth his opinion on the issue of authorship quite clearly:
>The Beatles don't exist and can never exist again. John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Richard Starkey could put on a concert... but it can never be the Beatles singing 'Strawberry Fields' or 'I Am The Walrus' again, because we are not in our 20s. We cannot be that again, nor can the people who are listening. (Sheff)

For Lennon, the “author” known as the Beatles or the “author” known as Lennon-McCartney or any other collective of individuals who are considered a single authorial entity can only truly be considered such while they write and produce work in the mindset of that collective. Lennon believes that he and his former bandmates are no longer the Beatles—that each of them is no longer a Beatle— and that he is no longer the first half of “Lennon-McCartney” because for him, the Beatles and Lennon-McCartney are nothing more and nothing less than the group of young men from Liverpool living together, writing and performing their own rock songs with the mindset of precocious young artists on the cutting edge of pop music. Though now dead, the author Lennon-McCartney was once very much alive, “like the beginning of a relationship.”

As with any group of artists, Lennon and McCartney are very aware of their own separate talents and what they each bring to the collaboration. In his interview with Playboy, Lennon positively gushes about McCartney’s individual talents as a musician and songwriter. He notes, for example, that “Paul is quite a capable lyricist who doesn’t think he is,” and that he is “one of the most innovative bass players ever. And half the stuff that is going on now is directly ripped off from his Beatles period.” Lennon in this way confirms at least that he acknowledges McCartney’s talents as McCartney's, distinguishing them from his own. 

John Oates’s once spoke of his desire to resist having his popular musical collaboration with Daryl Hall be known as “Hall & Oates.” He says, “The idea of ‘Hall and Oates,’ this two-headed monster, this thing, is not anything we've ever wanted or liked.” To similar ends, John Lennon points out in his Playboy interview the very different creative roles that he and McCartney played in their collaboration. He says, "Well, you could say that he [McCartney] provided a lightness, an optimism, while I would always go for the sadness, the discords, a certain bluesy edge.”

Here Lennon touches on the classic aesthetic maxim that great art consists of a balance between, as Friedrich Nietzche puts it in The Birth of Tragedy, the “Apolline” and the “Dionysiac.” He seems to be of the opinion that he, Lennon, brings to the table the Dionysiac aspect of their art — the chaotic and emotional “discords” which appeal to base human instinct — while McCartney generally brings the Apolline — the classically beautiful “lightness” and “optimism” that appeals to human rationalism and love of symmetry. 

This dichotomy shows in most Beatles songs that are documented to have been primarily written by either Lennon or McCartney individually, such as Lennon’s “Happiness is a Warm Gun” from the Beatles’ 1968 self-titled album (commonly referred to as *The White Album*). The song features cryptic, erotic imagery in the lyrics and a heavy, grungy, guitar-centric musical sound to create a raw, sexual kind of atmosphere. The very next track on *The White Album*, though, is McCartney’s “Martha My Dear,” a playful pastiche of old-fashioned dance hall music, with a cheerful lyric and a bright, catchy melody accompanied by a piano and brass and string sections.

Paul McCartney makes similar observations looking back on his early Beatles days. In his 2013 interview with McCartney, Howard Stern asks him about an alleged incident of John Lennon being under the influence of LSD while recording in the studio. He asks in his typically sensationalist fashion, “Wasn’t that just completely debilitating to you that your partner is tripping, you’re in the studio trying to work?” McCartney just laughs and fondly recalls that Lennon had taken the drug by accident, believing at the time that it was a "little upper," and that it did not pose a problem in the studio. He even goes on to recount that he himself took a dose of acid later that night so he could “be with [his] friend.”

Stern’s question indicates that, decades after the end of their collaboration and after Lennon’s death, he thinks of the pair primarily in terms of the friction and conflict between their individual egos that ultimately leads to their dissolution. McCartney, however, looks back nostalgically on the story as an instance of camaraderie and solidarity. This moment in the McCartney interview is a powerful reminder of the disconnect between the public perception of the pair’s collaboration, represented by Stern, and Lennon’s and McCartney’s perception of it.

This disconnect, of course, often manifests in quite the opposite manner as well, with public perception sometimes overestimating the extent of their collaboration. During the Beatles’ approximately decade-long run in the 1960’s, fans were less concerned with individual contributions to the composition of the songs, perhaps too caught up in the frenzied and often violent “Beatlemania.” After the band breaks up and the mania dies down in the 1970’s, however, the Beatles start to become a kind of artifact of popular culture and are afforded more intellectual and scholarly attention, much of which has to do with the authorship of individual songs.

Two of the most prominent and oft-cited tomes of Beatles history, Ian MacDonald’s *Revolution in the Head: The Beatles’ Records and the Sixties* from 1994 and Bruce Spizer’s *The Beatles on Apple Records from 2003* develop in-depth histories and analyses of every song in the Beatles’ recorded discography. Both books make it clear which songs were written by whom, even noting more specific details of a song’s composition when possible, such as who wrote the music and who wrote the lyrics, or who wrote the verses and who wrote the chorus.

The presentation of this information in this way undermines the conception of the double-headed, single-bodied songwriting entity called “Lennon-McCartney” that is pushed by more commerical Beatles products. The liner notes for their 1967 album Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, for example, state that “all songs [are] composed by Lennon/McCartney except * Harrison,” the asterisk indicating the one George Harrison-penned track on the album, “Within You Without You.” Even products from unofficial third-parties like Hal-Leonard Publishing Corporation’s *The Beatles Fake Book* propagate this narrative of the hybrid Lennon-McCartney author. *The Beatles Fake Book* is a book of abbreviated sheet music for every studio recording from the Beatles, and every transcription shows who wrote the music and who wrote the lyrics. For all original Beatles songs in the book (some of them are songs from other artists covered by the Beatles), the only names that are ever given writing credit are “GEORGE HARRISON,” “RICHARD STARKEY” (Ringo Starr’s birth name), and “JOHN LENNON and PAUL MCCARTNEY.” The collaborative relationship between Lennon and McCartney became so enshrined in the industry’s conception and portrayal of the band that neither of them are afforded the individual credit, even on songs which either one or the other is known to have written alone, that Harrison and Starr enjoy despite being much less prolific contributors to the band’s body of work.

It sounds unfair, but Lennon admits that he in fact deliberately signed up for it when he and McCartney were fifteen years old and they struck a personal deal that “when [they] decided to write together that [they] put both [their] names on it, no matter what.” This deal calls into question the credibility of any claim that a piece was composed jointly by Lennon and McCartney since, even if only one or the other did all the composing, they would still attribute it to the two-headed Lennon-McCartney monster to honor their childhood promise.

The credibility of Lennon-McCartney attributions is also called into question by high-running emotions and personal feelings between the two. David Sheff, the reporter for Playboy who interviewed Lennon in 1980, asks him, “Haven’t you said that you wrote most of your songs separately, despite putting both of your names on them?” to which Lennon replies “Yeah, I was lying (laughs). It was when I felt resentful, so I felt that we did everything apart. But, actually, a lot of the songs we did eyeball to eyeball.” Even Lennon himself cannot decide on the true nature of the authorship of Lennon-McCartney, making calls based on arbitrary outside conditions.

Lennon perhaps has the right idea in his contemplation of the author Lennon-McCartney — that it is so fluid and dynamic that it is impossible to pin to it a single coherent theory or formula by which to objectively gauge it. Fans can latch on to the simpler corporate attribution of the vast majority of Beatles songs to the Lennon-McCartney monster, or they can buy into MacDonald’s and Spizer’s investigations of the extent of their individual contributions. A third option, of course, would be to follow Lennon’s example and give in to the mystery, obscuring it even further and focusing on the music that comes out of that mysterious and beautiful entity. 



## Works Cited
+ MacDonald, Ian. Revolution in the Head: the Beatles’ Records and the Sixties. Pimlico, 2005.
+ McCammon, Ross. “John Oates: How Hall & Oates Started.” Esquire, Esquire, 9 Jan. 2012, www.esquire.com/entertainment/interviews/a12310/john-oates-quotes-0112/.
+ Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Birth of Tragedy: Out of the Spirit of Music. Translated by Shaun Whiteside, Penguin Books, 2003.
+ Sheff, David. “Playboy Interview with John Lennon and Yoko Ono.” Playboy, vol. 28, no. 1, Jan. 1981.
+ Spizer, Bruce. The Beatles on Apple Records. 498 Productions. L.L.C., 2003. 
+ Stern, Howard. “Sir Paul McCartney Visits the Studio.” The Howard Stern Show, Howard 100, 8 Oct. 2013.
+ The Beatles Fake Book. Hal Leonard, 1987.

[Home] | [Technical Writing] | [Academic Writing](academicwriting.md) | [Marketing]
